Exorcising the Ghost in the Machine: Synthetic Spectral Data Cubes for Assessing
Big Data Algorithms.

The size and quantity of the data that is being generated by large astronomical
projects like ALMA, requires a paradigm change in astronomical data analysis.
Complex data, such as highly sensitive spectroscopic data in the form of large
data cubes, are not only difficult to manage, transfer and visualize, but they
also turn unfeasible the use of traditional data analysis techniques and
algorithms.  Consequently, the attention have been placed on machine learning
and artificial intelligence techniques, to develop approximate and adaptive
methods for astronomical data analysis within a reasonable computational time. 

Unfortunately, these techniques are usually sub-optimal, stochastic and strongly
dependent of the parameters, which could easily turn into "a ghost in the
machine" for astronomers and practitioners. Therefore, a proper assessment of
these methods is not only desirable but mandatory for trusting them in
large-scale usage. The problem is that positively verifiable results are scarce
in astronomy, and moreover, science using bleeding-edge instrumentation
naturally lacks of reference values.

We propose an Astronomical SYnthetic Data Observatory (ASYDO), a virtual service
that generates synthetic spectroscopic data in the form of data cubes. The
objective of the tool is not to produce accurate astrophysical simulations, but
to generate a large number of labelled synthetic data, to assess advanced
computing algorithms for astronomy and to develop novel Big Data algorithms. The
synthetic data is generated using a set of spectral lines, template functions
for spatial and spectral distributions, and simple models that produce
reasonable synthetic observations. Emission lines are obtained automatically
using IVOA's SLAP protocol (or from a relational database) and their spectral
profiles correspond to distributions in the exponential family.  The spatial
distributions correspond to simple functions (e.g., 2D Gaussian), or to scalable
template objects. The intensity, broadening and radial velocity of each line is
given by very simple and naive physical models, yet ASYDO's generic
implementation supports new user-made models, which potentially allows adding
more realistic simulations. The resulting data cube is saved as a FITS file,
also including all the tables and images used for generating the cube. We expect
to implement ASYDO as a virtual observatory service in the near future.

 

#These methods have been successfully applied in
#large astronomical surveys, because uninformed techniques are data consuming and
#need homogeneous data samples. The next step is to develop efficient computing
#models that can encode prior astrophysical knowledge and to support
#heterogeneous data.

